Supporting the maintence of critical open source projects changes the way that scientific exploration is done and encourages increased adoption of open source methodologies, in line with the reccomendations of the National Academies of Science ``Open Source Software Policy Options for NASA Earth and Space Sciences (2018)'' report.

An immediate conesquence of this work is to improve Matplotlib's handling of data with physical units attached; currently, physical units are largely but inconsistently supported within the library. This refactor will allow us to consolidate unit handling code and standardize its behavior across the library.  The importance of handling physical units in computation is well-recognized in the Scientific Python Ecosystem; core libraries including NumPy (NEP40-43), pandas, and xarray are working to add support for physical units to their foundational data structures.  The proposed work will ensure that Matplotlib can take advantage of such efforts, for seamless handling of data with units from computation to visualization.  Additionally, this refactor will lay the ground work for future enhancements such as smart resampling, native consumption of structured data, out-of-memory data, seamless updating, and alternative data sources such as analytic functions or database queries.

To sustain Matplotlib and continue to support the hundred of thousands
of users and hundreds of downstream packages will require continued maintenance of the library and its community.  This includes tasks like promptly fixing critical bugs and regressions as they are reported, producing regular releases, answering user questions, facilitating discussions, community management, and general project management.  Dedicated full-time developers help ensure that crucial tasks happen in a consistent and timely manner, and provide the roadmaps that will steer the future of the library

Matplotlib is used throughout the SMD community, including flagship missions like the Hubble Space Telescope and the James Webb Space Telescope.  Domain specific libraries, such as AstroPy (astrophyics), sunpy (heliophysics), and Cartopy (earth science), extend Matplotlib to provide specialized plotting.  Given the breadth of Matplotlib usage across the SMD divisions, small investments in Matplotlib will have returns across the entire SMD portfolio.
